Title: Grizzly Design Summit schedule posted
Date: 2012-10-10 14:03
Author: Thierry Carrez
Tags: OpenStack
Slug: grizzly-design-summit-schedule-posted

Next week our community will gather in always-sunny San Diego for the
[OpenStack Summit](http://www.openstack.org/summit/san-diego-2012/). Our
usual [Design Summit](http://wiki.openstack.org/Summit) is now a part of
the general event: the [Grizzly Design
Summit](http://wiki.openstack.org/Summit/Grizzly) sessions will run over
the 4 days of the event ! We start Monday at 9am and finish Thursday at
5:40pm. The schedule is now up at:

> <http://openstacksummitfall2012.sched.org/overview/type/design+summit>

This link will only show you the *Design Summit* sessions. Click
[here](http://openstacksummitfall2012.sched.org/) for the complete
schedule. Minor scheduling changes may still happen over the next days
as people realize they are double-booked, but otherwise it's pretty
final now.

For newcomers, please note that the *Design Summit* is different from
classic conferences or the other tracks of the OpenStack Summit. There
are **no formal presentations or speakers**. The sessions at the *Design
Summit* are open discussions between contributors on a specific
development topic for the upcoming development cycle, moderated by a
session lead. It is possible to prepare a few slides to introduce the
current status and kick-off the discussion, but these should never be
formal speaker-to-audience presentations.

I'll be running the [**Process**
topic](http://openstacksummitfall2012.sched.org/overview/type/design+summit/Process),
which covers the development process and core infrastructure
discussions. It runs Wednesday afternoon and all Thursday, and we have a
pretty awesome set of stuff to discuss. Hope to see you there!

If you want to talk about something that is not covered elsewhere in the
Summit, please note that we'll have an **Unconference** room, open from
Tuesday to Thursday. You can grab a 40-min slot there to present
anything related to OpenStack! In addition to that, we'll also have
5-min **Lightning talks** after lunch on Monday-Wednesday... where you
can talk about anything you want. There will be a board posted on the
Summit floor, first come, first serve :)

More details about the Grizzly Design Summit can be found [on the
wiki](http://wiki.openstack.org/Summit/Grizzly). See you all soon!
