Title: OpenStack BugTriage day
Date: 2012-06-06 09:51
Author: Thierry Carrez
Tags: OpenStack
Slug: openstack-bugtriage-day

Tomorrow, **Thursday June 7th**, the OpenStack community will run a
BugTriage day. Why are we doing this ? What are we going to do ? How can
you participate ?

Bug tracking is an essential part of our development processes.
Well-maintained bug lists help us know the current state of our projects
better, define bugfixing priorities, and identify milestone and
release-critical issues.

The trick is, the bug lists can quickly get unusable if they are not
well-maintained. Most of our core projects managed to keep their bug
lists relevant and current, but the largest ones (Nova and Swift)
allowed some pile-up in the recent months... and that creates a vicious
circle: as the bug tracker becomes less relevant, bugs gets even less
attention, and things get worse.

BugTriage days are a category of
[BugDays](http://wiki.openstack.org/BugDays) specifically designed to
break this vicious circle. They were discussed at the Folsom [Design
Summit](http://wiki.openstack.org/Summit) as a way to improve our bug
triaging practice. The idea is to concentrate efforts, for one day, in
making our bug tracker relevant again, and start a virtuous circle of
maintenance instead of of a vicious circle of abandonment.

How are we going to achieve that ? The
[BugTriage](http://wiki.openstack.org/BugTriage) page on the wiki
describes a set of triaging tasks that we should complete. Task one, for
example, is about confirming incoming, untouched "New" bugs. The goal is
to complete as many tasks as possible. Participants will gather in the
**\#openstack-bugday** IRC channel on Freenode. It starts as soon as
it's Thursday somewhere in the world, and will last as long as it's
still Thursday somewhere. We will track the results of our efforts live
on [pretty graphs](http://wiki.openstack.org/bugstats/), to quantify how
well we do.

So please join us tomorrow in that long-overdue Spring cleaning effort,
which will go a long way into making Folsom an awesome OpenStack release
! You can read more about the whole event
[here](http://wiki.openstack.org/BugDays/20120607BugTriage).

Â 
