Title: The 6 dimensions of Open Source
Date: 2010-09-08 13:49
Author: Thierry Carrez
Tags: Open source, Popular
Slug: the-6-dimensions-of-open-source

Why do people choose to participate in Open Source ? It's always a mix
of various reasons, so let's try to explore and classify them.

### Technical

The first dimension is technical. People like open source because
looking directly in the code gives them the ability to **understand**
the behavior of their software. No documentation can match that level of
precision. They also like the ability to **fix** it themselves when it's
broken, rather than relying on usually-broken support contracts. Any
non-Fortune500 that tried to report a bug to Microsoft and get it fixed
will probably get my point. Sometimes, they like the ability to
**shape** and influence the future of the software, when that software
uses open design mechanisms (like Ubuntu with its free and
open-to-anyone Development Summits). Finally, they may be convinced,
like I am, that open source software development methods result in
better code **quality**.

### Political

Next to the technical dimension, we have a political dimension, more
precisely a *techno-political* dimension. People like Free software as a
way to preserve end-user **freedom**, **privacy** and **control** over
technology. Some powerful companies will use every trick in the book to
reduce your rights and increase their revenue, so its more and more
important that we are aware of those issues and fight back. Working on
free and open source software is a way to contribute to that effort.

### Philosophical

Very close to the political dimension, we are now seeing philosophic
interest in open source software. The 20th century saw the creation of a
consumer class with a new divide between those who produce and those who
consume. This dissociated usage of technology is a self-destroying
model, and contributing models (or participative production models) are
considered to be the solution to fix our societies for the future. Be a
producer and a consumer at the same time and be **associated** with
technology rather than alienated by it. Open source is an early and
highly successful manifestation of that.

### Economical

Back on the ground, there are strong and rational economic reasons for
companies to opt to fund open source development. From most virtuous to
less, we first find companies **using** the technology internally rather
than selling it : sharing development and maintenance costs among
several users of that same technology makes great sense, and makes very
virtuous open source communities. Next you find companies selling
**services** around open source software: being the main sponsor of a
project gives you a unique position to leverage your know-how around
software that is freely available. Next you find **open core**
approaches, from companies making a business selling proprietary add-ons
to those using open source as crippleware. Finally, at the bottom,
you'll find companies using "open source" or "community" as a venture
capitalist **honeypot**. They don't believe in it, they resist
implementing what it takes to do it, but they like the money that
pretending to do open source will bring them.

### Social

A very important dimension of open source is the social dimension. Many
people join open source projects to **belong** to a cool community that
allows you to prove yourself, gain mastery and climb the ladder of a
meritocracy. If your community doesn't encourage and reward those that
are in this social dimension, you'll miss a huge chunk of potential
contributors. Another social aspect is that doing work in the open (and
in all transparency) is also great publicity for your skills and to get
**employment**. The main reason I got hired by Canonical was due to my
visible work on Gentoo's Security team, much more than to the rest of my
professional experience. Finally, the sheer **ego-flattering** sensation
you get by knowing that millions of people are using your work is
definitely a powerful drive.

### Ethical

The last dimension is ethical: the idea of directly contributing to the
sum of the world's common knowledge is appealing. Working on open source
software, you just make the world a better place. For example, open
source helps third-world and developing countries to reduce their
external debt, by encouraging the creation of local service companies
rather than encouraging to buy licenses to US companies. That sense of
**purpose** is what drives a lot of people (including me) to work on
open source.

Did I miss anything ? What drives you to participate on open source ?
Please let me know, by leaving a comment !
