Title: Virtualization & Cloud devroom at FOSDEM
Date: 2012-01-13 14:43
Author: Thierry Carrez
Tags: OpenStack
Slug: virtualization-cloud-devroom-at-fosdem

The Free and Open source Software Developers' European Meeting, or
[FOSDEM](http://fosdem.org/2012/), is an institution that happens every
year in Brussels. A busy, free and open event that gets a lot of
developers together for two days of presentations and cross-pollination.
There are typically the FOSDEM main tracks (a set of presentations
chosen by the FOSDEM organization) and a set of devrooms, which are
topic-oriented or project-oriented and can organize their own schedule
freely.

This year, FOSDEM will host an unusual devroom, the Virtualization and
Cloud devroom. It will happen in the Chavanne room, a 550-seat
auditorium that was traditionally used for main tracks. And it will last
for two whole days, while other devrooms typically last for a day or a
half-day.

The Virtualization and Cloud devroom is the result of the merging of
three separate devroom requests: Virtualization, Xen and OpenStack
devrooms. It gives us a larger space and a lot of potential for
cross-pollination across projects ! We had a lot of talks proposed, and
here is an overview of what you'll be able to see there.

#### Saturday, February 4

Saturday willÂ  be the "cloud" day. We will start with a set of talks
about **OpenStack, past, present and future**. I will do an
[introduction and
retrospective](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/openstack_news) of
what happened last year in the project, Soren Hansen will [guide new
developers to
Nova](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/hacking_on_nova), and Debo
Dutta will look into future work on [application scheduling and
Donabe](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/app_scheduling). Next
we'll have a session on various**cloud-related technologies**:
[libguestfs](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/libguestfs),
[pacemaker-cloud](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/pacemaker_cloud)
and [OpenNebula](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/opennebula). The
afternoon will start with a nice session on **cloud interoperability**,
including presentations on the
[Aeolus](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/aeolus),
[CompatibleOne](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/compatibleone) and
[Deltacloud](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/deltacloud)
[efforts](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/dmtf_deltacloud). We'll
continue with a session on **cloud deployment**, with a strong OpenStack
focus: Ryan Lane will talk about how Wikimedia maintains infrastructure
[like an open source
project](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/wikimedia_infra), Mike
McClurg will look into
[Ubuntu+XCP+OpenStack](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/openstack_xcp_ubuntu)
deployments, and Dave Walker will introduce the [Orchestra
project](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/cloud_orchestration). The
day will end with a [town hall
meeting](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/osdem) for all
**OpenStack developers**, including a panel of distribution packagers: I
will blog more about that one in the next weeks.

#### Sunday, February 5

Sunday is more "virtualization" day ! The day will start early with two
presentations by Hans de Goede about
[Spice](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/spice) and [USB
redirection over the
network](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/usb_network_redirect).
Then we'll have a session on **virtualization management**, with Guido
Trotter giving more [Ganeti
news](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/ganeti_news) and
[three](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/ovirt_intro)
[talks](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/ovirt_engine_core)
[about](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/ovirt_vdsm) oVirt. In the
afternoon we'll have a more technical session around **virtualization in
development**: Antti Kantee will introduce ultralightweight kernel
service virtualization with [rump
kernels](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/rump_kernels), Renzo
Davoli will lead a [workshop on tracing and
virtualization](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/tracing_virt_workshop),
and Dan Berrange will show how to build application [sandboxes on top of
LXC and KVM with
libvirt](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/libvirt_lxc_kvm_sandboxes).
The day will end with another developers meeting, this time the **Xen
developers** will meet around Ian Campbell and his [Xen deployment
troubleshooting workshop](http://fosdem.org/2012/schedule/event/xen).

All in all, that's two days packed with very interesting presentations,
in a devroom large enough to accomodate a good crowd, so we hope to see
you there !
